📚 add docs for integrating jupyter compute using `thebe` (#372)
executablebooks/mystjs: docs/integrating-jupyter.md

---
title: Integrating Jupyter based Computation
short_title: Integrating Jupyter
description: blah
thumbnail: thumbnails/integrating-jupyter.png
---

MyST allows you to connect a website directly to a Jupyter Kernel, enabling interactive computation on your page.

This allows you to do some amazing things with your MyST website like:

- Allow readers to recompute your notebooks for themselves, demonstrating the reproducibility of your work
- Provide a new level of interactive content via `ipywidgets` and `ipywidgets` backed libraries such as `ipympl`, `ipyleaflet`, etc...
- Connect to Binder based compute services
- 🚧 Compute using the in-browser `pyodide` WASM kernel (backed by JupyterLite)

```{attention}
Integrated Jupyter Computation is hot off the press and currently limited to pages that represent complete Jupyter notebooks.
We are in active development and this feature should be considered `beta` - please help us out [report any issues that you find](https://github.com/executablebooks/mystjs/issues).

> While being able to connect a jupyter based figure or output in any website page to a kernel is still work in progress - but expected very soon. The remainder of the docs below are forward looking, watch for the 🚧 icons on headings what are still work in progress.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Being able to connect a jupyter-based figure or output in any website page to a kernel is still work in progress - but expected very soon. The remainder of the docs below are forward looking, watch for the 🚧 icons on headings that are still work in progress.
```

```{code} yaml
:caption: an example myst.yml file with thebe enabled
version: 1
project:
    title: Geocomputing
    thebe: true
site:
    template: book-theme
    title: My Computational Website
```

When the boolean form of the `thebe` key is used, MyST will try to determine where to connect to from existing `github` and `binder` keys you may have on your project and is intended to allow for easy setup of a few key use cases. To go beyond or override these, you can provide various options in the `thebe` field.

### Case - `thebe:true` and no `github` or `binder` keys are present

```yaml
project:
  thebe: true
```

When `thebe:true` and no `github` or `binder` keys are present MyST will try to connect to a server using the default (local settings). To make this work you'll need to [](#start-a-local-jupyter-server) with the correct defaults or [provide alternative direct connection options](#directly-connecting-to-a-jupyter-server).

Note this is equivalent to:

```yaml
project:
  thebe:
    server: true
```

### Case - `thebe:true` and the `github` key is present

```yaml
project:
  github: executablebooks/thebe-binder-base

>   thebe:

Reviewer: Should this just be `thebe: true`? This config and the "equivalent" config below are identical.

project:
  binder: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/executablebooks/thebe-binder-base/HEAD
  thebe: true
```

When `thebe: true` and the `binder` key is present, MyST will use the binder information to establish a connection, the `github` field will be ignored.

Note this is also equivalent to:

```yaml
project:
  binder: https://mybinder.org/v2/gh/executablebooks/thebe-binder-base/HEAD
  thebe:
    binder: true
```

### 🚧 Case - Using Pyodide & JupyterLite

`thebe` can provide access to the pyodide WASM kernel to enable in-browser computation. This uses in browser Jupyter server components deveoped as part of the [JupyterLite project](https://jupyterlite.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) and will be extended in future to provide for different kernels.

The JupyterLite server and `pyodide` kernels can be activated using:

```{code} yaml
:caption: an example myst.yml file with thebe enabled
project:
    thebe:
        lite: true
```

This will load the server using the default options, to learn more about how using JupyterLite can affect site deployment and how environment setup works with pyodide see [](#🚧-integrated-compute-with-pyodide-via-jupyterlite)

### Disabling integrated compute

> Easily disable integrated compute on your project by either setting `thebe:false` or removing the key alltogether.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Easily disable integrated compute on your project by either setting `thebe:false` or removing the key altogether.
```

```{code} bash
jupyter lab --NotebookApp.token=test-secret --NotebookApp.allow_origin='*'
```

The command above is fine for local development and the `token` used should align with that provided in the `project.thebe.token` key.

When starting a local Jupyter server for use with MyST it's also important to understand your computational environment and ensure that the Jupyter instance has access to that with the dependencies it needs to run. This is acheived by following normal best practices for reproducible environment configuration, if you're not familiar with these see [REES](https://repo2docker.readthedocs.io/en/latest/specification.html).

## Reference

### Complete options schema

```{code-block} yaml
project:
  thebe: undefined(false) | boolean | object
    lite: boolean
    binder: undefined(false) | boolean | object
      url: string (url)
      repo: string (org-name/repo-name)
      ref: string (valid git refs only?)
      provider: string (git | gitlab | github)
    server:  undefined(false) | boolean | object
      url: string (url)
      token: string (any)
    kernelName: string (any)

>     sessionSaving: boolean (default: true)

Reviewer: Should this be `disableSessionSaving: boolean (default: false)`?

And also updated in the table below?
